Delivery Method: 
        VIA UPS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
      
      
              Product: 
        Drugs                          
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
             
            
            
            
              
            
            
            
      
          
              





  
    

        Recipient:

                      
  
    Recipient Name
              Mr. Jonathan Alonzo Gonzalez Espinoza
          

                                
  
    Recipient Title
              Chief Executive Officer
          

          
            JG Atlas Comercios, SA de CV

          
                      Trueno No. 871 Paraisos Del Colli
45069 Zapopan,
Mexico
          
          
          
    
              

       
    
          
          Issuing Office:
        
         
          Center for Drug Evaluation and Research | CDER
        
         
          United States
        
        
        
        
        
    
     
      
    
    
      


 

 



Warning Letter 320-21-09

November 06, 2020

Dear Mr. Alonzo:

Your firm recently registered as a human drug manufacturer. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) conducted testing of a consumer antiseptic drug product labeled as Sayab Antiseptic Hand Sanitizer. This drug product was labeled as manufactured at your facility, JG Atlas Comercios S.A. de C.V., Trueno No. 871 Paraisos Del Colli, Zapopan, Mexico. Following an attempt to import this drug product into the United States, Sayab Antiseptic Hand Sanitizer was detained and refused admission at the border.

The results of FDA laboratory testing of batches of this product detained at the border demonstrate that the Sayab Antiseptic Hand Sanitizer drug product, labeled as manufactured at your facility, is adulterated within the meaning of section 501(d)(2) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act or the Act), 21 U.S.C. 351(d)(2), in that a substance was substituted wholly or in part therefor. In addition, this product is adulterated within the meaning of section 501(a)(2)(B) of the FD&C Act, 21 U.S.C. 351(a)(2)(B), in that the substitution demonstrates that the quality assurance within your facility is not functioning in accordance with Current Good Manufacturing Practice (CGMP) requirements.

In addition, Sayab Antiseptic Hand Sanitizer is an unapproved new drug introduced or delivered for introduction into interstate commerce in violation of section 505(a) of the FD&C Act, 21 U.S.C. 355(a) and is misbranded under sections 502(j), (a), (e), and (ee) of the FD&C Act, 21 U.S.C. 352(j), (a), (e), and (ee). Introduction or delivery for introduction of such a product into interstate commerce is prohibited under sections 301(d) and (a) of the FD&C Act, 21 U.S.C. 331(d) and (a). These violations are described in more detail below.

Adulteration Violations

Sayab Antiseptic Hand Sanitizer, a drug product labeled as manufactured at your facility, is labeled to contain 70% of the active ingredient alcohol (ethanol). FDA tested four batches of this product detained at the border. The first sample contained an average of 0.1% ethanol volume/volume (v/v) and 62% methanol v/v. The second sample contained an average of 0.1% ethanol v/v and 68% methanol v/v. The third sample contained an average of 10% of ethanol v/v and 57% methanol v/v. The fourth sample contained an average of less than 0.3% of ethanol v/v and 63% methanol v/v. Therefore, this consumer antiseptic drug product is adulterated under section 501(d)(2) of the FD&C Act in that the active ingredient of ethanol was substituted wholly or in part with methanol, a dangerous chemical when in contact with human skin or ingested.

Methanol is not an acceptable ingredient for consumer antiseptics and should not be used due to its toxic effects. Skin exposure to methanol can cause dermatitis, as well as transdermal absorption with systemic toxicity. Substantial methanol exposure can result in nausea, vomiting, headache, blurred vision, permanent blindness, seizures, coma, permanent damage to the nervous system, or death. Although all persons using these products on their hands are at risk, young children who accidentally ingest these products and adolescents and adults who drink these products as an alcohol (ethanol) substitute are most at risk for methanol poisoning.

While the contaminated drug product described above was shipped to the United States, information available to FDA suggests that all of your consumer antiseptic drug products were detained and refused admission at the border and did not enter the United States. Therefore, FDA did not recommend that you remove this product from the market. On July 30, 2020, FDA notified the public of the methanol contamination in your consumer antiseptic drug product at the following website: https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/fda-updates-hand-sanitizers-consumers-should-not-use

In response to this letter provide the following:

• A detailed investigation into how the consumer antiseptic drug product described above, labeled as manufactured at your facility and labeled as containing ethanol, was substituted in part or in whole with methanol.
• A list of all raw materials used to manufacture all of your consumer antiseptic drug products, including the suppliers’ names, addresses, and contact information.
• A list of all batches of any consumer antiseptic drug products shipped to the United States by your firm, and a full reconciliation of all material you distributed.
• Copies of the complete batch records for all batches distributed to the U.S.

The substitution and methanol contamination in consumer antiseptic drug products labeled as manufactured in your facility demonstrates that the quality assurance within your facility is not functioning in accordance with CGMP requirements under section 501(a)(2)(B) of the Act.1

Unapproved New Drug and Misbranding Violations

Sayab Antiseptic Hand Sanitizer is a “drug” as defined by section 201(g)(1)(B) of the FD&C Act, 21 U.S.C. 321(g)(1)(B), because it is intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease and/or under section 201(g)(1)(C) of the FD&C Act, 21 U.S.C. 321(g)(1)(C), because it is intended to affect the structure or any function of the body. Specifically, this product is intended for use as a topical antiseptic.

Examples of claims observed on the product label that provide evidence of the intended use (as defined in 21 CFR 201.128) of the product include, but may not be limited to, the following:

    “Antiseptic Hand Sanitizer . . . “

    “Drug Facts . . . Purpose . . . Antiseptic . . . Use for hand washing to decrease bacteria on the skin . . . Directions wet hands thoroughly with product and allow hands to dry without wiping”2 (product label)

This topical antiseptic product is a “new drug” within the meaning of section 201(p) of the FD&C Act, 21 U.S.C. 321(p), because it is not generally recognized as safe and effective (GRASE) for use under the conditions prescribed, recommended, or suggested in its labeling. New drugs may not be introduced or delivered for introduction into interstate commerce without prior approval from FDA, as described in section 505(a) of the FD&C Act, 21 U.S.C. 355(a), unless they are lawfully marketed under section 505G of the FD&C Act (which is not the case for this product, as further described below). No FDA-approved application pursuant to section 505 of the FD&C Act, 21 U.S.C. 355, is in effect for this drug product, nor are we aware of any adequate and well-controlled clinical studies in the published literature that support a determination that your Sayab Antiseptic Hand Sanitizer drug product is GRASE for use under the conditions suggested, recommended, or prescribed in its labeling. Accordingly, this product is an unapproved new drug marketed in violation of sections 505(a) and 301(d) of the FD&C Act, 21 U.S.C 355(a) and 331(d).

We note that over-the-counter (OTC) topical antiseptic products had been the subject of rulemaking under the Agency’s OTC Drug Review. In particular, such products were addressed in a tentative final monograph (TFM) entitled “Topical Antimicrobial Drug Products for Over-the-Counter Human Use; Tentative Final Monograph for Health-Care Antiseptic Drug Products,” Proposed Rule, 59 FR 31402 (June 17, 1994) (1994 TFM), as further amended by the “Safety and Effectiveness of Consumer Antiseptics; Topical Antimicrobial Drug Products for Over-the-Counter Human Use; Proposed Amendment of the Tentative Final Monograph; Reopening of Administrative Record,” Proposed Rule, 81 FR 42912 (June 30, 2016).

Over the course of these rulemakings, benzalkonium chloride, ethyl alcohol (ethanol), and isopropyl alcohol were classified as Category III for use as active ingredients in antiseptic rubs, meaning that additional safety and effectiveness data are needed to support a determination that a drug product containing one of these active ingredients would be GRASE for use as a consumer antiseptic rub. Additionally, OTC consumer antiseptic washes were addressed in the Safety and Effectiveness of Consumer Antiseptics; Topical Antimicrobial Drug Products for Over-the-Counter Human Use (Consumer Antiseptic Washes); Proposed Rule 78 FR 76444 (December 17, 2013) and OTC Safety and Effectiveness of Topical Antimicrobial Drug Products for Over-the-Counter Human Use (Consumer Antiseptic Washes); Final Rule 81 FR 61106 (September 6, 2016). We note that ethyl alcohol is not one of the active ingredients that was classified as Category III for use as an active ingredient in a consumer antiseptic wash. Under the Consumer Antiseptic Washes rulemaking, ethyl alcohol was determined to be ineligible for evaluation under the OTC Drug Review for use as an active ingredient in consumer antiseptic washes.

Section 505G of the FD&C Act addresses nonprescription drugs marketed without an approved application. Under section 505G(a)(3) of the FD&C Act, drugs that were classified as Category III for safety or effectiveness in a TFM that is the most recently applicable proposal or determination for such drug issued under 21 CFR Part 330 -- and that were not classified as Category II for safety or effectiveness -- are not required to have an approved application under section 505 in order to be marketed, as long as they are in conformity with the relevant conditions of use outlined in the applicable TFM, including the active ingredient, and comply with all other applicable requirements.

However, Sayab Antiseptic Hand Sanitizer does not conform to the 1994 TFM, as further amended by the 2016 Consumer Antiseptic Rub proposed rule and the Consumer Antiseptic Washes proposed rule, nor any other TFM, proposed rule, or final rule, and does not meet the conditions under section 505G(a)(3) of the FD&C Act for marketing without an approved application under section 505.

As previously noted, statements on the Sayab Antiseptic Hand Sanitizer label suggest both that the product is a consumer antiseptic wash and that it is a consumer antiseptic rub. However, ethanol (in any concentration) is not an active ingredient permitted for use in consumer antiseptic hand washes under the 1994 TFM as amended by the Consumer Antiseptic Washes proposed rule. Moreover, antiseptic washes are outside the scope of FDA’s temporary policies for hand sanitizers.

Furthermore, according to the product label, Sayab Antiseptic Hand Sanitizer purportedly contains the active ingredient ethyl alcohol 70%. However, as previously discussed, FDA laboratory analyses of batches of this product detained at the border revealed that samples of Sayab Antiseptic Hand Sanitizer contain a concentration of ethyl alcohol that is far less than the 70% declared on the label.3 Thus, the product does not conform with the 1994 TFM and other applicable requirements, nor is it consistent with the formulations described in FDA’s temporary policies for hand sanitizers during the COVID-19 public health emergency.4

FDA laboratory analysis of batches of this product detained at the border revealed that samples of Sayab Antiseptic Hand Sanitizer contain significant concentrations of the undeclared ingredient methyl alcohol (methanol). Use of methanol as an active ingredient is not in conformance with the 1994 TFM, nor is it included in the formulations described in FDA’s Temporary Policy for Preparation of Certain Alcohol-Based Hand Sanitizer Products During the Public Health Emergency (COVID-19) Guidance for Industry. Furthermore, methanol is not acceptable as an inactive ingredient in topical antiseptics. As previously discussed, methanol has significant and sometimes fatal toxic effects and, therefore, does not meet the requirements under 21 CFR 330.1(e) that a product’s inactive ingredients be safe and suitable.5

Finally, Sayab Antiseptic Hand Sanitizer is misbranded under sections 502(j), (a), (e), and (ee) of the FD&C Act, 21 U.S.C. 352(j), (a), (e), and (ee) It is misbranded under section 502(j) of the FD&C Act, 21 U.S.C. 352(j), because it is dangerous to health when used according to its labeling as a consumer antiseptic drug product. As previously stated, skin exposure to methanol could lead to systemic absorption, and substantial methanol exposure can potentially result in, among other things, blindness, permanent nervous system damage, and even death.

This consumer antiseptic drug product is misbranded under section 502(a) of the FD&C Act, 21 U.S.C 352(a), because its labeling is false and misleading. As noted above, Sayab Antiseptic Hand Sanitizer is labeled to contain ethyl alcohol 70%. However, FDA laboratory analyses of batches of this product detained at the border revealed that samples of this product contain far less ethyl alcohol (ethanol) than is the amount stated on the product label and instead contain significant concentrations of methyl alcohol (methanol), an ingredient that is not declared on the product labels.

Section 201(n) of the FD&C Act, 21 U.S.C. 321(n), provides that “in determining whether the labeling or advertising is misleading there shall be taken into account . . . not only representations made or suggested . . . but also the extent to which the labeling or advertising fails to reveal facts material in the light of such representations or material with respect to consequences which may result. . . .” Thus, the misleading representation of the concentration of the active ingredient ethyl alcohol (ethanol) and the failure of the product label to disclose the presence of the methyl alcohol (methanol) in the product causes this product to be misbranded under section 502(a) of the FD&C Act, 21 U.S.C. 352(a).

The failure of this product to list methyl alcohol (methanol) as an ingredient on its label causes it to be misbranded under section 502(e)(1)(A) of the FD&C Act, 21 U.S.C. 352(e)(1)(A).

Lastly, this product is misbranded under section 502(ee) of the FD&C Act, 21 U.S.C. 352(ee) because it is a nonprescription drug subject to section 505G of the FD&C Act, 21 U.S.C. 355h, but does not comply with the requirements for marketing under that section and is not the subject of an application approved under section 505 of the FD&C Act, 21 U.S.C. 355.

The introduction or delivery for introduction of a misbranded drug into interstate commerce is prohibited under section 301(a) of the FD&C Act, 21 U.S.C. 331(a).

CGMP Consultant Recommended

Based upon the nature of the violations we identified at your firm, we strongly recommend engaging a consultant qualified, as set forth in 21 CFR 211.34, to evaluate your operations and to assist your firm in meeting CGMP requirements if your firm intends to resume manufacturing drugs for the U.S. market. We also recommend that the qualified consultant perform a comprehensive audit of your entire operation for CGMP compliance and that the consultant evaluates the completion and efficacy of your corrective actions and preventive actions before you pursue resolution of your firm’s compliance status with FDA. Your use of a consultant does not relieve your firm’s obligation to comply with CGMP. Your firm’s executive management remains responsible for resolving all deficiencies and systemic flaws to ensure ongoing CGMP compliance.

Conclusion

The violations cited in this letter are not intended to be an all-inclusive list of violations associated with your drug products. You are responsible for investigating and determining the causes of these violations and for preventing their recurrence or the occurrence of other violations.

Note that FDA placed all drugs and drug products manufactured by your firm on Import Alert 66-78 on August 7, 2020, as the methods used in and controls used for the manufacture, processing, packing, or holding of these products do not appear to conform to current good manufacturing practice within the meaning of section 501(a)(2)(B) of the FD&C Act. Your drugs and drug products may be subject to detention without physical examination.

All drugs and drug products manufactured by your firm may remain listed on this import alert until there is evidence establishing that the conditions that gave rise to the appearance of the violation have been resolved, and the Agency has confidence that future entries will be in compliance with the Act. This may include an inspection prior to the agency considering the appearance of adulteration to be addressed.

If you decide you want to manufacture drugs for the United States in the future, request a Regulatory Meeting to discuss corrective actions.

After you receive this letter, respond to this office in writing within 15 working days. Specify what you have done to correct your violations and to prevent their recurrence. If you cannot complete corrective actions within 15 working days, state your reasons for delay and your schedule for completion. If you believe that your products are not in violation of the FD&C Act, include your reasoning and any supporting information for our consideration.

Send your electronic reply to CDER-OC-OMQ-Communications@fda.hhs.gov

Identify your response with FEI 3016829724 and ATTN: William Yang.

Sincerely,
/S/

Francis Godwin
Director
Office of Manufacturing Quality
Office of Compliance
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research

CC:
Registered US Agent
David Lennarz
Registrar Corp
144 Research Drive
Hampton, VA 23666

____________________

1 Due to an increased demand for alcohol-based hand sanitizers during the COVID-19 pandemic, FDA published the Guidance for Industry: Temporary Policy for Preparation of Certain Alcohol- Based Hand Sanitizer Products During the Public Health Emergency (COVID-19) on March 19, 2020, and subsequently updated the guidance several times, most recently on August 7, 2020. This guidance communicates the Agency’s temporary policy that we do not intend to take action against firms for CGMP violations under section 501(a)(2)(B) of the FD&C Act if such firms prepare alcohol-based hand sanitizers for consumer use (or for use as health care personnel hand rub) during the public health emergency, provided certain circumstances described in the guidance are present. These circumstances include preparation of hand sanitizer products using only the ingredients and formulas set forth in the guidance. In addition to the violative sample results detailed above that demonstrate the presence of methanol in your consumer antiseptic product labeled as manufactured at your facility, a review of your drug product labeling indicates that this product is not prepared consistent with FDA’s temporary policy set forth in the guidance. Therefore, this product does not fall within the Agency’s temporary policy not to take action against firms manufacturing hand sanitizer products for violations of section 501(a)(2)(B) of the FD&C Act.

2 We note that your Sayab Antiseptic Hand Sanitizer labeling contains conflicting information regarding whether it should be used as a consumer antiseptic wash or a consumer antiseptic rub. The term “hand sanitizer” generally refers to consumer antiseptic rubs, and the Drug Facts Label of your product both indicates that the product is to be used for handwashing (presumably with water) and suggests that it should be used without water (i.e., “wet hands thoroughly with product and allow hands to dry without wiping”). The Sayab Antiseptic Hand Sanitizer product, however, does not conform to the requirements for either a consumer antiseptic rub or a consumer antiseptic wash, as further described below.

3 The 1994 TFM, which does not distinguish between antiseptic hand washes and rubs, proposed for antiseptic handwashes and healthcare personnel handwashes an alcohol concentration of 60 to 95% by volume in an aqueous solution: 59 FR at 31442. Later amendments to the 1994 TFM distinguished between antiseptic hand washes and rubs, and between consumer and healthcare personnel antiseptics, but did not change the alcohol concentration originally proposed in 1994.

4 See, e.g., Temporary Policy for Preparation of Certain Alcohol-Based Hand Sanitizer Products During the Public Health Emergency (COVID-19). Because Sayab Antiseptic Hand Sanitizer is not consistent with the formulations in these guidances, it does not fall within any temporary Agency policy not to take action against firms manufacturing hand sanitizer products for violations of section 505 of the FD&C Act.

5 An inactive ingredient used in over-the-counter (OTC) monograph drugs must meet the requirements of 21 CFR 330.1(e), which requires, among other things, that inactive ingredients must be safe in the amount administered.